**Chapter 01 [Building, Running, and the REPL](https://www.braveclojure.com/getting-started/)**


By the end of the chapter, you’ll know how to do the following:
- Create a new Clojure project with Leiningen
- Build the project to create an executable JAR file
- Execute the JAR file
- Execute code in a Clojure REPL


<!-- vim-markdown-toc GFM -->

* [First Things First: What Is Clojure?](#first-things-first-what-is-clojure)
* [Leiningen](#leiningen)
    * [Creating a New Clojure Project](#creating-a-new-clojure-project)
    * [Running the Clojure Project](#running-the-clojure-project)
    * [Building the Clojure Project](#building-the-clojure-project)
* [Using the REPL](#using-the-repl)
* [Clojure Editors](#clojure-editors)

<!-- vim-markdown-toc -->

# First Things First: What Is Clojure?

When talking about Clojure, though, it’s important to keep in mind the distinction between the Clojure language and the Clojure compiler. The Clojure language is a Lisp dialect with a functional emphasis whose syntax and semantics are independent of any implementation. The compiler is an executable JAR file, *clojure.jar*, which takes code written in the Clojure language and compiles it to Java Virtual Machine (JVM) bytecode. You’ll see *Clojure* used to refer to both the language and the compiler, which can be confusing if you’re not aware that they’re separate things.

This distinction is necessary because, unlike most programming languages like Ruby, Python, C, and a bazillion others, Clojure is a *hosted language*. Clojure programs are executed within a JVM and rely on the JVM for core features like threading and garbage collection. Clojure also targets JavaScript and the Microsoft Common Language Runtime (CLR), but this book only focuses on the JVM implementation.

You need to understand are these:
- JVM processes execute Java bytecode.
- Usually, the Java Compiler produces Java bytecode from Java source code.
- JAR files are collections of Java bytecode.
- Java programs are usually distributed as JAR files.
- The Java program *clojure.jar* reads Clojure source code and produces Java bytecode.
- That Java bytecode is then executed by the same JVM process already running *clojure.jar*.

# Leiningen
We will focus on using [Leinigen](https://leiningen.org/) for four tasks:
1. Creating a new Clojure project
1. Running the Clojure project
1. Building the Clojure project
1. Using the REPL

## Creating a New Clojure Project
```bash
lein new app clojure-noob
```


```bash
> cd clojure-noob
> tree
.
├── CHANGELOG.md
├── doc
│   └── intro.md
├── LICENSE
├── project.clj
├── README.md
├── resources
├── src
│   └── clojure_noob
│       └── core.clj
└── test
    └── clojure_noob
        └── core_test.clj

6 directories, 7 files
```
- `project.clj`: a configuration file for Leiningen.
- `resources` is where you store assets like images.
- `src/clojure_noob/core.clj` is where you’ll be writing your Clojure code for a while.
- `test`

## Running the Clojure Project
`src/clojure_noob/core.clj`:
```clojure
(ns clojure-noob.core
  (:gen-class))

(defn -main
  "I don't do a whole lot ... yet."
  [& args]
  (println "Hello, World!"))
```
Navigate to the `clojure_noob` directory in your terminal and enter:
```bash
lein run
```
You should see the output `"Hello, World!"`.
```bash
clojure-noob> lein run
Retrieving org/clojure/clojure/1.10.0/clojure-1.10.0.jar from central
Hello, World!
```
## Building the Clojure Project
```
lein uberjar
```
This command creates the file *target/uberjar/clojure-noob-0.1.0-SNAPSHOT-standalone.jar*. You can make Java execute it by running this:
```bash
clojure-noob> java -jar target/uberjar/clojure-noob-0.1.0-SNAPSHOT-standalone.jar
Hello, World!
```

You now have all the basic details you need to *build*, *run*, and *distribute* (very) basic Clojure programs.

# Using the REPL
The REPL is a tool for experimenting with code. It allows you to interact with a running program and quickly try out ideas.

To start a REPL, run this:
```
lein repl
```



```bash
nREPL server started on port 34843 on host 127.0.0.1 - nrepl://127.0.0.1:34843
REPL-y 0.4.3, nREPL 0.6.0
Clojure 1.10.0
OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM 1.8.0_242-b08
    Docs: (doc function-name-here)
          (find-doc "part-of-name-here")
  Source: (source function-name-here)
 Javadoc: (javadoc java-object-or-class-here)
    Exit: Control+D or (exit) or (quit)
 Results: Stored in vars *1, *2, *3, an exception in *e

clojure-noob.core=> 
```



```clojure
clojure-noob.core=> (-main)
Hello, World!
nil
clojure-noob.core=> (+ 1 2 3 4)
10
clojure-noob.core=> (* 1 2 3 4)
24
clojure-noob.core=> (first [1 2 3 4])
1
```
```clojure
clojure-noob.core=> (do (println "no prompt here!")
               #_=>   (+ 1 3))
no prompt here!
4
```
# Clojure Editors
- Emacs
- Sublime Text for Coljure:  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wBl0rYXQdGg/
- Vim: http://mybuddymichael.com/writings/writing-clojure-with-vim-in-2013.html
- Eclipse: https://github.com/laurentpetit/ccw/wiki/GoogleCodeHome
- Intellij IDE: https://cursiveclojure.com/
- Nightcode:  https://github.com/oakes/Nightcode/
